
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Employee Guide for the Classified Layoff Process
March 2016. Office of Human Resources, Employee Relations, Classification and Compensation.
0





Classified Layoff Process

Employee Guide
MARCH 2016
OFFICE OF HUMAN RESOURCES


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Employee Guide for the Classified Layoff Process
March 2016. Office of Human Resources, Employee Relations, Classification and Compensation.
1
An Employee Guide for the Classified Layoff Process
Revised March 2016
Introduction
Budget reductions and reorganizations may require departments to eliminate classified positions.
Through the layoff process an employee has the opportunity to discover new opportunities and
challenges that may be available.
Employee Notification
Your supervisor has provided you with the “official” written notification from the Office of Human
Resources (OHR).  In addition, you have been given a copy of your seniority report.  The first decision
you need to make is whether you will accept layoff, or choose to exercise your layoff rights and begin
the process of pursuing a new opportunity.  Be sure to respond to the Employee Relations contact
person listed on your layoff notification letter with your decision within 5 work days.  Should you choose
to exercise your layoff rights, you need to take action immediately so that the search for a new
opportunity can begin.  You may want to get started by immediately completing an Employment Profile.
Completing an Employment Profile
To complete an Employment Profile through the OSU Jobs website, go to http://oregonstate.edu/jobs
.
This website is designed to prompt you to provide as much information as possible.  You need to make
sure you include all of your relevant employment experience, skills, and education in the Employment
Profile. Be as complete and as specific as possible. Also, proofread the information very carefully to
ensure that the information is accurate, spelling is correct, and there are no “typos”.  If you have
difficulty in entering the information to your Employment Profile, you can email a message to
employment@oregonstate.edu for help. Your Employment Profile should be up to date within five work
days, as failure to do so may limit your opportunities. The Employment Relations contact will evaluate
your qualifications for placement into another position.  The information you provide allows the
Employee Relations contact to consider all alternatives.  Once you have completed or updated the
Employment Profile, inform your Employee Relations Contact so we will know it is available for the
placement search.  The update of the Employment Profile may be completed on work time.
Opportunity Search
Once your Employment Profile has been completed, the Employee Relations contact can begin working
to determine if there are vacant positions for which you are qualified and can be placed in. To be
considered for placement the vacancy must be in your same classification, geographical area (within 15
miles of your current work site), and matches your full or part-time status.  In addition, to be
considered, you must be able to meet the minimum qualifications for the position and be able to
perform the specific requirements of the position within two weeks. After all available vacancies are
considered, vacancies at lower level salary ranges will be reviewed.  Keep in mind that you will never be

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Employee Guide for the Classified Layoff Process
March 2016. Office of Human Resources, Employee Relations, Classification and Compensation.
2
expected to accept a position that is more than 5 salary ranges below your current level.  The collective
bargaining agreement is clear on this point; however, you are free to apply to any available position.
When a viable position becomes available, your Employee Relations contact will communicate with the
hiring manager and forward your Employment Profile.  You will receive a copy of the job posting.  The
manager will provide feedback about your prior work history to ensure you are able to perform the
requirements of the job.  Also, we expect you to provide information to us if you do not have the skills
to perform the job.  Our goal, always, is to place you in a position in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the collective bargaining agreement.  Should you or the hiring manager provide comments
or feedback that a match may not exist; additional information will be requested to work through all
considerations.  If there appears to be a match, a meeting with the hiring manager will be scheduled.
Although not an interview, it is best to interact as though you were in an interview sharing your positive
attributes that demonstrate to the new supervisor that you are actively engaged in the process.
Bumping
If no vacancy is available, you will have to decide if you will bump another employee from their position.
Your right to bump is based on your being an employee in good standing.  An employee who has been
disciplined by denial of a merit salary increase, reduction in pay, demotion, or suspension within the
previous twelve (12) months and whose discipline is not currently under appeal through the Grievance
and Arbitration Procedure is not eligible to displace another employee.  Your ability to bump another
employee is also based on seniority.  Seniority is calculated as one point for each full month of unbroken
classified Oregon University System service (pro-rated for part-time employment).  This includes
employment in all classifications in which you have worked, provided you have not had a break in
service of more than two years.  There are many variables associated with seniority calculations (e.g.
employment with other OUS institutions, proration of part-time employment).
Employee Placement
Placement is not voluntary.  You cannot choose the position that you will be placed into; neither can the
receiving department choose whether or not to accept you into the position.  Should you decline a
placement, either through transfer or bumping, you will be laid off.  It is highly recommended that you
manage your placement.  You have the right to apply for other opportunities that are not included in
your layoff rights.  Once placed, you may also choose to continue to apply for another position that best
fits your needs.
Recall List
Should you accept a layoff or be laid off because no opportunities became available for placement; you
will be placed on the layoff recall list.    You will be placed on the list for the classification, employment
category, and work site from which you were laid off. You will remain on the recall list for one year. You
may choose to be designated for recall for a geographic location different from your current work site.
However, that request must be submitted in writing to your Employee Relations contact. You have the

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
Employee Guide for the Classified Layoff Process
March 2016. Office of Human Resources, Employee Relations, Classification and Compensation.
3
right to refuse an offer once while on the recall list.  Upon a second refusal of an offer, your name will be
removed from the recall list.

Additional Resources
 Job Loss website
 http://oregonstate.edu/admin/hr/jobloss/employee
OSU Job Site
http://oregonstate.edu/jobs
The Employee Assistance Program (EAP) is a source of support for you during this time.  Cascade
Centers, Inc., the University’s EAP provider, has been actively involved in assisting employees and
supervisors during layoffs over many years.  The staff at Cascade Centers is experienced in helping
employees deal with feelings of frustration, anger, and depression that can occur while trying to sustain
a positive and productive career search.  You are encouraged to take advantage of Cascade Centers’
support and experience.  They may be reached at (800) 433 2320.
Oregon Unemployment Division
http://www.oregon.gov/EMPLOY/Unemployment/Pages/default.aspx
Benefits
The benefits team can assist with questions regarding your benefits including health insurance and
retirement contributions. The benefits team can be reached at (541) 737-2805 or at
employee.benefits@oregonstate.edu. Visit the website at:
 http://hr.oregonstate.edu/benefits


Revised 3/1/2016




